# CHAPTER 3

## EDUCATION

**DO NOT SKIP THIS SECTION.** Every hour you spend in this preparation section will save you five when you really start building your aircraft.

## GENERAL

In this section you won't build any part of your airplane.
What you will do is learn how to build your airplane the right way.
This construction technique is radically different from anything you've done before (including building boats, surfboards, airplanes, and Go-Karts),
and you should assume there is only one correct way to do it.
We've discovered lots and lots of wrong ways of doing things and have written the plans to keep you from repeating our mistakes.
We insist that you do things our way.
If you have a better idea, suggest it to us.
We'll publish details in the "Canard Pusher."

This section will teach you all of the techniques required to build your airplane, show you what special tools you need and how to use them.
The educational samples that you will build in this section are designed to give you experience and confidence in all of the techniques that you will use in the construction of your airplane.
The steps in the construction of each sample are arranged in sequence (as are the steps in construction of the actual aircraft parts) and you should follow the sequence without skipping any steps.
You will learn the basic glass layup technique used throughout the aircraft,
special corner treatments, foam shaping/cutting, and joining methods.
A summary of these techniques is provided on yellow paper for you to tack up on your shop wall.

## TOOLS

There are certain tools which are necessary to complete the aircraft.
Three lists of tools are provided here.
The first is the absolute bare minimum required, sacrificing efficiency; the second is a recommended list for the best compromise of cost and work efficiency; the third is a list for the "Cadillac" of shops where ease of construction is more important than money.
The uncommon items are stocked by the Long-EZ distributors.

### Basic Required Tools

- Common household butcher knife
- Coping saw
- 1/4" drive socket set
- Small open-end wrenches
- Sandpaper
  - 36-grit carborundum Aloxite Fastcut (50 sheets)
  - 220-grit wet or dry silicon carbide (20 sheets)
  - 320-grit wet or dry silicon carbide (20 sheets)
- Disston Abrader #401c - Tool for carving fiberglass.
- 5/8" conterbore with 1/4" pilot; 10" long shank
- 12" long, 1" dia. drill bit
- Peel-ply
- 2" dia. drum sander (coarse) for 1 1/4" drill
- Coarse rotary file bit for 1/4" drill
- Pliers
- 1" putty knife
- Hacksaw
- Blade and Phillips screwdriver
- Box of single-edge razor blades
- 24" carpenter's level
- Carpenter's square
- Felt marking pens
- 3-ft straightedge
- 200 8-oz paper cups
- 50 3-oz paper cups (wax-free)
- 12-ft decimal steel tape (Stanley #61-112)
- 1/4" drill with #30, #3, #10, 1/4", #3, 15/64", #12, and #21" bits
- #10-32 and 1/4-28 taps
- Roll of gray duct tape
- 1" and 2" paint brushes (100 each)
- 6" plastic or rubber squeegees
- Scissors
- Wire brush
- Pop rivet puller
- Homemade balance for measuring epoxy ratios
- Wall thermometer 50-100 degrees F
- 1/4" hand drill

### Recommended Tools

(the following tools are to be used in addition to the basic tools)

- Dremel-type miniature high-speed hand grinder with saw and router bits
- 6" to 9" disc-type hand sander
- Set of 1/4", 1/2" and 1" chisels (wood)
- Small set of X-Acto knives
- Stipple rollers
- 1/2" dia. 100 degree counter sink (piloted)
- 6" machinist steel ruler
- X-Acto razor saw
- Box of wood tongue depressors to mix epoxy
- 6-ft straightedge
- Cheap hole saw set or fly cutter
- 3/8" variable-speed hand drill
- 12" long drill bits - #10 and 1/4"
- Hand broom/brush
- Large commercial 12" scissors (Will #20W)
- Sabersaw
- Bench-mounted belt sander
- Stanley surform plane
- Square and half round file
- Several 6" C-clamps
- Shop vacuum cleaner
- 10" 18 tooth/inch handsaw (see sketch)
- Approx. 150 lbs of small weights*

\* Weights are used to hold various parts down while epoxy cures.
They're best in 5 to 15-lb pieces.
The items in the photo work great.
We got them for 5¢/lb at a local scrap yard.
Sand-filled milk cartons also work well.
Lead shot bags also work well.

**<INSERT EXAMPLE WEIGHTS IMAGE>**

### For the First Class Shop

(the following tools are to be used in addition to the basic tools)

- Drill press
- 18-inch bandsaw
- Vernier Caliper
- Epoxy ratio pump (Michael Engineering dispenser)
- 90 degree drill adapter
- Air compressor with blow nozzle
- Orbital sander
- 3/8" and 1/2" spotface
- Drill sets #1 - #60 and 1/16 - 1/2 (1/64 inch)

### Occasionally Used Items (can be borrowed)

- Nicopress sleeve tool
- 1 dozen 1/8" Clecos
- Hotwire voltage control

## HOMEMADE TOOLS

### Sanding Blocks

These are required in many areas during construction and for finishing.
You may aso use a "soft block,"
which is a block of the blue styrofoam wrapped with sandpaper.

A lot of elbow grease is saved if you replace the sandpaper often.

### Long Straightedge

This is not absolutely required,
but is quite handy when jigging or checking the straightness of flying surfaces.
It is merely a 6-ft or 8-ft 1x3 or 1x4 piece of lumber that is hand-selected to be "eyeball straight."

You can get it one of two ways:

1. Order it from Aircraft Spruce or Wicks - they plane them perfect from dry lumber.
2. Sort through the lumber (dry fir or redwood) at your local lumber yard until you find one that looks straight when you eyeball it from one end. Mark it and hang it on the wall so it doesn't end up as part of a shelf!

### Epoxy Balance

Devices which automatically ratio the correct amount of resin and hardener and dispense it with the pull of a lever are available from Long-EZ distributors for approximately $130.
These save time and epoxy.
You can also ratio the epoxy the way we did in building N7EZ and N4EZ by building the following simple balance:
Cut out the 5-step instructions and glue to your balance - don't skip steps!
Follow each step **exactly** every time you mix epoxy.

#### Balance Instructions

Place the following instructions on your balance:

1. Place both empty cups as shown (wet the hardener cup).
2. Adjust ballast weight to level mark.
3. Fill resin cup with desired amount of resin - 1 to 6 oz.
4. Add hardener to hardener cup to balance scale on level mark.
5. Pour the hardener into the resin cup and mix.

# TODO: FINISH EPOXY BALANCE AND HOT WIRE CUTTER

### Jig Table

You will need a table to jig and build the wings and canard.
It should be at least 3 ft by 11 ft.
Any larger than 4 ft by 12 ft will just get in the way.
Use a little care in making a flat, untwisted surface.
The following is a sketch of the one we made and it works fine.
The box design makes it stiff in torsion.
Set it up with the top 35 to 39 inches above the floor.
Don't get carried away with surface finish since you are going to be gluing blocks to it with bondo and chiseling them off several times.

**<INSERT JIG TABLE IMAGE>**

## MATERIALS

The materials, processes, and terminology used in the construction of your Long-EZ are new to homebuilding.
This section is devoted to familiarizing you with the language, materials, and techniques used in these plans.
This information is basic to the construction of your airplane.
You should study this section and be sure that you understand all of it before continuing.

There are five basic materials that you will be working with:
fiberglass cloth, epoxy, microspheres, flox, and foam. Each material, its properties, and uses will be discussed in detail.
Basic processes using these materials will also be discussed.

### Glass

The most basic structural materials in your Long-EZ is glass cloth.
Glass cloth is available commercially in hundreds of different weights, weaves, strengths, and working properties.
The use of glass in aircraft structures, particularly structural sandwich composites,
is a recent development.
Very few of the commercially available glass cloth types are compatible with aircraft requirements for high strength and light weight.
Even fewer are suitable for the hand-layup techniques developed by RAF for the homebuilder.
The glass cloth used in the Long-EZ has been specifically selected for the optimum combination of workability, strength, and weight.

The glass cloth in your Long-EZ carries primary loads, and its correct application is of vital importance.
Even though doing your glass work correctly is important,
this doesn't mean that it is difficult;
in fact, it's VariEze!

**<INSERT CLOTH DIRECTIONALITY IMAGE>**

Two types of glass cloth are used:
A bi-directional cloth (RA5177UND), and a unidirectional cloth (RA5177UND).
Use the full part number for ordering your cloth.
For simplicity, the plans will use only the BID or UND designations.
BID cloth has half of the fibers woven parallel to the selvage edge of the cloth and the other half at right angles to the selvage, giving the cloth the same strength in both directions.
The selvage is the woven edge of a bolt of fabric as shown in the accompanying sketch.

**<INSERT SELVAGE IMAGE>**

UND cloth has 95% of the glass volume woven parallel to the selvage giving exceptional strength in that direction and very little at right angles to it.

BID is generally used as pieces which are cut at a 45-degree angle to the selected selvage and laid into contours with very little effort.
BID is often applied at 45-degree orientation to obtain a desired torsional or shear stiffness.
UND is used in areas where the primary loads are in one direction and maximum efficiency is required, such as the wing skins and spar caps.

Multiple layers of glass cloth are laminated together to form the aircraft structure.
Each layer of cloth is called a ply and this term will be used throughout the plans.

Marking and cutting the plies of glass cloth is a job that you will repeat often in the construction of your Long-EZ.
Glass cloth should be stored, marked, and cut in a clean area with clean hands and clean tools.
Glass contaminated with dirt, grease, or epoxy should not be used.
A clean, smooth surface is needed for marking and cutting.
The area used for storing and cutting glass cloth should be separated from the aircraft assembly area because it will be exposed to foam dust,
epoxy, and other things which can contaminate the cloth.
You will need a good sharp pair of scissors, a felt-tipped marker, a fairly straight board,
and a tape measure for marking and cutting.
The small amount of ink from marking and numbering plies has no detrimental effects on the glass cloth.

In each step, the size, type, and fiber orientation of each ply is given.
Take the list to your glass cutting table, roll out a length of the appropriate cloth,
straighten the selvage, mark all of the plies, and cut them.

Now is a good time to stop reading long enough to go and cut a square ply of BID and see how easy it is to change its shape by pulling and pushing on the edges as shown in the sketches.
Cut a square with the fibers running at 45° and pull on the edges to shape the piece.

**<INSERT GLASS DEFORM IMAGE>**

It helps if you make fairly straight cuts but don't worry if your cut is within 1/2 inch of your mark.
As you cut BID it may change shape, just as the square ply that you are experimenting with does when you pull on one edge.
Plies that distort when cut are easily put back into shape by pulling on an edge.
Rolling or folding cut plies will help keep them clean and make it easier to maintain their shape.
If several plies are called for, it may help to number them before cutting.
Save your clean scraps and make an effort to use them for smaller plies.
If the cloth is spotted with epoxy, throw it away.
When cutting long strips or large pieces of 45° BID, *always* roll or fold it so it keeps its shape when handled.
When it's applied, it can be set on one end of the part and *rolled* onto it.
If you pick up each end, it will distort and not fit the part properly.
The fiber orientation called for in each materials list is important and shouldn't be ignored.
UND is characterized by the major fiber bundles running parallel to the selvage and being much larger than the small cross fibers which run at right angles to the selvage.
In BID, the cross fibers are the same size as those running parallel to the selvage,
giving BID an even "checker board" appearance.
BID is commonly used for plies cut at 45° to the selvage.
Your tailor would call this a "bias" cut.
The 45° cut makes it easy to work wrinkles out of a ply locally, without having to chase it to the far edge.
The 45° cut also makes it possible to make a ply slightly longer than originally cut by pulling on the ends,
or wider by pulling the sides.
The 45° orientation isn't critical; you don't need to measure it.
Your eyeball of a rough diagonal (45° ±10°) is adequate when either cutting or laying up the cloth.

### Epoxy

In recent years the term "epoxy" has become a household word.
Unfortunately, "epoxy" is a general term for a vast number of specialized resin/hardener systems in the same way as "aluminum" is a general term for a whole family of specialized metal alloys.
Just as the "aluminum" in the spar of a high performance aircraft is vastly different from the "aluminum" pots and pans in your kitchen, the "epoxy" in your Long-EZ is vastly different from the hardware store variety.

Epoxy is the adhesive matrix that keeps the plies of load-carrying glass cloth together.
Epoxy alone is weak and heavy.
It is important to use it properly so that the full benefits of its adhesive capability are obtained without unnecessary weight.
A large portion of your education in composite structural work will be spent learning how to get the full strength of an epoxy/glass mixture with the minimum weight.
This section will discuss the terminology and techniques for working with epoxy resin and its hardener.

An "epoxy system" is made up of a resin and a hardener tailored to produce a variety of physical and working properties.
The mixing of resin with its hardener causes a chemical reaction called curing, which changes the two liquids into a solid.
Different epoxy systems produce a wide variety of solids,
ranging from extremely hard to very flexible.
Epoxy systems also vary greatly in their working properties.
Some are very thick, slow-pouring liquids, and others others are like water.
Some epoxy systems allow hours of working time, and others harden almost as fast as they are mixed.
A single type of resin is sometimes used with a variety of hardeners to obtain a number of different characteristics.
In short, there is no universal epoxy system; each has its own specific purpose, and while it may be the best for one application, it could be the worst possible in another use.

The RAE-type epoxy systems used in the construction of your Long-EZ are tailored for the best combination of workability and strength,
as well as to protecc the foam core from heat damage and solvent attacc.
These systems are also low in toxicity (SPI-2) to minimize epoxy rash.
These epoxies are not similar to the common types normally marketed for fiberglass laminating.
Three different systems are used in the Long-EZ for three different types of work:
a slow-curing system, a fast-curing system, and a 5-minute system.
The very fast curing (5-min) system is used much like clecos are used in sheet metal construction (or clamps in woodwork) for temporary positioning.
Five-minute is also used in some areas where high strength is not required, but where a fast cure will aid assembly.

As an epoxy system cures, it generates heat and, in some areas, the heat buildup of a medium or fast-curing epoxy system is unacceptable.
Where this is a potential problem, a slow curing system is used.
Slow cure epoxy is always used with styrofoam, where heat can melt the foam away and ruin the joint.
In other areas where heat buildup isn't a problem and a faster cure is desirable, a fast-curing system is used.
Both the fast and slow cure epoxies will cure to a firm structure at room temperature within one day.
Complete cure takes 14 days.

The RAF epoxy systems are called RAES (for slow curing), RAEF (fast curing), and 5MIN.
Both the RAES and RAEF hardener use the same RAE resin.

**<INSERT EPOXY MIXES IMAGE>**

**Note:** If working conditions are hot (85° to 90°), RAES can be used where RAEF is called out.
While this practice is allowable, the best results are obtained working between 70 and 80°F with the specified epoxy.

The working and strength characteristics of an epoxy system are dependent on the resin, the hardener, and on the amount of each in a given mixture.
Epoxy systems are engineered for a specific ratio of resin and hardener.
It is quite important that the proper mixture be obtained.
An accurate balance or ratio pump must be used to accomplish this.
A drawing of an inexpensive ratio balance is included in these plans, Pg 3-2.
The mix ratio accuracy is particularly important with RAEF and RAES.
The 5-MIN can be adequately ratioed by merely pouring a blob of part A in a cup and adding a blob of part B that looks the same volume before mixing.
**Never** eyeball estimate RAEF or RAES, **always** carefully use the balance or pump.

Epoxy resin and hardener are mixed in small batches, usually 6 ounces or less, even in the largest layup.
The reason for small batches is that, in large batches, as the hardening reaction progresses,
heat is generated which speeds the reaction, which causes even more heat, which ends up in a fast reaction called and exotherm.
An exotherm will cause the cup of epoxy to get hot and begin to thicken rapidly.
If this occurs, throw it away and mix a new batch.
The small volume batch avoids the exotherm.
For a large layup, you will mix many small batches rather than a few large ones.
With this method, you can spend many hours on a large layup using epoxy that has a working life of only a few minutes.
If the epoxy is spread thin as in a layup its curing heat will quickly dissipate and it will remain only a few degrees above room temperature.
However, in a thick buildup or cup, the low surface area to mass ratio will cause the epoxy to retain its heat, increasing its temperature.
This results in a faster cure causing more heat.
This unstable reaction is called an exotherm.
Exotherm temperatures can easily exceed the maximum allowable for foam (200° F) and can damage the foam-to-glass bond.
This is why the slow epoxy system is used in joining foam cores as exotherm is impossible as long as epoxy joint thickness is less than 1/8".

Unwaxed paper cups are used for mixing and ratioing resin and hardener.
Convenient 8-oz cups for resin are available from RAF distributors.
The hardener cups are the 3-oz unwaxed bathroom paper cups available at any grocery store.
Don't use waxed cups; the wax will contaminate your epoxy.

If you are using the homebuilt balance, follow this procedure.
Place the resin (8 oz cup) on the right cradle.
The resin cup can be either a new clean cup, one with a little uncured epoxy left in the bottom,
or a clean cup from a previous layup with hard epoxy in the bottom (smooth, not lumpy).
Now, taxe a clean 3-oz hardener cup, pour a splash of hardener into it,
then scrape the hardener back into the container.
This gives the hardener a wet surface so its remaining hardener will not be counted in the balancing.
Now place the wet hardener cup on the scale.
Check that it swings freely and balance it perfectly by moving the small weight.
Epoxy is then poured into the 8 oz cup (6 oz or less).
Hardener is then poured into the 3-oz cup at the other end of the balance until the arm is level.
When ready to mix, pour the hardener into the resin cup and mix completely.
If you have the ratio pump,
you simply put on cup under the spout, pump out the amount that you want, and mix.

Mixing is done by stirring with a stick, being careful not to spill any.
If you spill part of the unmixed cu, the ratio of resin and hardener may be inaccurate and it shouldn't be used.
Mix each cup for **at least 2 minutes.**
You should spend 80% of your mixing time stirring the cup and 20% scraping the sides to assure complete mixing.
Do not mix with a brush.
The bristles can soak up the hardener, changing the ratio.
Use a tongue depressor or wooden stick.

The working temperature has a substantial effect on the pot life and cure time.
Very hot conditons will cause the cure to speed up.
In cold working conditions, the cure will be delayed and if it is cold enough,
epoxy may not cure at all.
Working temperatures must be between 65° and 95° F.
A range of 75° to 85° F is best.
Be sure to get a wall thermometer (approx. $1.50 at any general store) to check the temperature of your work area.
At 75°F, 5-min must be used within four minutes, RAEF must be used within 20 minutes,
and RAES must be used within 50 minutes.

Cold epoxy results in increased time required to do a layup, since it takes longer to "wet" and to squeegee the cloth.
A layup at 65° may take almost twice the time as at 75° F.
On most layups (except for joining foam cores) it's best to have 70° to 80° F room temperature and 80° to 90° F epoxy.
Resin and hardener can be kept warmer than room temperature by keeping it in a cabinet with a small light bulb on.
**Do not** store your resin or hardener on a cold floor if you plan to use it within the next several hours.
If you let your shop get cold between working periods, keep some resin and hardener in the warmest place of your house for use on the next layup.

Save your mixing cups, as they can be used as a quality check of your epoxy.
After a day or two, take a sharp knife point or scribe and scratch the surface of epoxy in the cured cup.
If the epoxy cured properly, the scribe will make a *white scratch mark*.
If the epoxy hasn't cured, the scribe will make a dull ridge, indicating a sfot surface.
If this occurs, the epoxy is not cured.
This is either due to inadequate time or temperature, bad mixing, or bad epoxy.
Refer to pg. 3-15 for details on the new SAF-T-POXY epoxy.

#### Microspheres

Microspheres are a very light filler or thickening material used in a mixture with epoxy.
Micro, as the mixture is called, is used to fill voids and low areas to glue foam blocks together,
and as a bond between foams and glass skins.
Several different types of microspheres and microballoons are available commercially.
The quartz-type supplied by RAF distributors is lighter and cheaper than most common types.
Microballoons must be kept dry.
If moisture is present, it will make them lumpy.
Bake them at 250° F, then sift with a flour sifter to remove lumps.
Keep the microballoon container covered.

Micro is used in three consistencies: a "slurry", which is a one-to-one by volume mix of epoxy and microspheres; "wet micro", which is about two-to-four parts microspheres by volume to one part epoxy; and "dry micro", which is a mix of epoxy and enough microspheres to obtain a paste which will not sag or run (about five parts-to-one by volume).
In all three, microspheres are added to **completely mixed** epoxy.
You do not have to accurately mix the microspheres; just dump them in until the desired consistency is obtained.
Micro slurry is used to paint over foams before glass cloth is applied over them.
Slurry is almost the same viscosity as the pure epoxy and is runny enough to apply with a brush.
However, the easiest way to apply slurry is to pour it onto the surface and spread it out evenly using a squeegee.
When skinning urethane foam, use a *full, thick* coat of slurry.
Inadequate slurry on urethane can result in a poor skin bond.
Wet micro is used to join foam blocks.
While it is much thicker than slurry, it is still thin enough to sag and run (like thick honey).
Dry micro is used to fill low spots and voids,
and is mixed so that it is a dry paste that won't sag at all.
In all three micro types, you don't measure; just add microspheres until the desired consistency is obtained.
Use micro only as specifically shown - never use micro between glass layers.

